Demystifying the Venus flytrap action potential
Rainer Hedrich, Ines Kreuzer
First published: 10 July 2023 https://doi.org/10.1111/nph.19113Digital Object Identifier (DOI)  view metrics
SectionsPDFTools Share
Summary
All plants are electrically excitable, but only few are known to fire a well-defined, all-or-nothing action potential (AP). The Venus flytrap Dionaea muscipula displays APs with an extraordinarily high firing frequency and speed, enabling the capture organ of this carnivorous plant to catch small animals as fast as flies. The number of APs triggered by the prey is counted and serves as the basis for decisions within the flytrap's hunting cycle. The archetypical Dionaea AP lasts 1 s and consists of five phases: Starting from the resting state, an initial cytosolic Ca2+ transient is followed by depolarization, repolarization and a transient hyperpolarization (overshoot) before the original membrane potential is finally recovered. When the flytrap matures and becomes excitable, a distinct set of ion channels, pumps and carriers is expressed, each mastering a distinct AP phase.


Contents
Summary	2108
I.	Introduction	2108
II.	Development of trap excitability	2109
III.	AP is a feature of all fast-moving plants	2110
IV.	Role of ion channels in electrical signalling and ionic osmolyte flow	2111
V.	Concluding remarks	2111
Acknowledgements	2111
References	2112
I. Introduction
The Venus flytrap's capability of firing action potentials (APs) is known since Darwin's time from touch-induced membrane potential changes, first monitored by Burdon-Sanderson (1873). Besides Dionaea – according to Charles Darwin – the ‘most wonderful plant of the world’ (Darwin, 1875), other actively hunting botanical carnivores also fire APs when in contact with prey (Hedrich & Fukushima, 2021). The flytrap recognizes collisions with living prey or touch by experimenters with the help of trigger hairs emerging from the inner trap surface. These sensory organs are equally spaced, three on each trap lobe (Fig. 1a). A 3° displacement of a trigger hair by a force of 30 μN – equivalent to the power of a mosquito – is sufficient to provoke an AP (Scherzer et al., 2019). The first AP, elicited by the initial touch deflection of a single trigger hair, is memorized for c. 20 s. If the same or another trigger hair is stimulated within these 20 s to bring a second AP on its way, the trap closes within 0.1 s. Remarkably, a calcium wave travels together and with the same fast speed as the AP (Fig. 1b). Both signals propagate with up to 10 cm s−1 along both trap lobes, a velocity unrivalled by other plant systems. The cytosolic Ca2+ transients of the first and second wave sum up, and upon reaching a critical threshold, they induce the release of viscoelastic energy stored in the open trap, making the trap snap shut (Suda et al., 2020). While the entrapped prey tries to escape, it will keep colliding with the trigger hairs and thus sustains AP firing. After having counted and integrated ‘2’ in the process of AP-dependent trap snapping, the following three to five or more APs are translated into jasmonate (JA) biosynthesis and signalling (Böhm et al., 2016). While the fast trap closure does not require JA, the touch hormone stimulates slow hermetical sealing of the capture organ and the activation of glands that cover the inner surface, which leads to the secretion of digestive enzymes into the newly formed green stomach (Scherzer et al., 2017).

Details are in the caption following the image
Fig. 1
Open in figure viewer
PowerPoint
(a) Open Dionaea muscipula trap. Trigger hairs located at the inner trap surface serve as mechanosensors: their displacement provokes the action potential. (b) Upon touch perception, calcium waves and action potentials (APs) are released and together propagate along both trap lobes. (c) Dionaea's AP consists of five distinct phases: after an initial Ca2+ influx via DmGLR3.6, the Ca2+ signal is amplified by a Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release (CICR) from the endoplasmic reticulum to an all-or-nothing cytosolic Ca2+ transient (phase 1). If the Ca2+ level passes the threshold, Cl− release via Ca2+-dependent ALMT anion channels triggers an initial, rapid depolarization (phase 2). Positive of −60 mV, depolarization-dependent DmSKOR K+ channels and DmAHA4 H+ pumps are activated and slow the depolarization kinetics (1st shoulder). At c. −20 mV, when anion efflux and K+ efflux compensate each other, the depolarization maximum is reached. The repolarization (phase 3) sets in when [Ca2+]cytosolic drops, the anion channel inactivates, and DmSKOR and DmAHA4 allow K+ and H+ release from the cell. Negative of −60 mV DmSKOR inactivates, slowing the fast, initial repolarization (2nd shoulder). The delayed deactivation of the depolarization-activated H+ pump results in sustained H+ export, thus provoking a transient overshoot hyperpolarization (phase 4). During membrane hyperpolarization, DmAHA4 voltage inactivates and H+-driven DmHAK5 and NRT-type anion transporters reset the pre-AP resting potential by recharging the K+ and anion battery (phase 5). (d) Two APs drive the cytosolic Ca2+ level above the threshold upon which rapid trap closure is unavoidable. Snap buckling is achieved by the release of K+ and anions and, in turn, turgor loss in the motor cells of the inner leaflet. As a result, the metastable hydrostatic pressure balance between inner and outer leaflet collapses and the open concave trap geometry flips over to the convex closed one.
The Venus flytrap Dyscalculia (DYSC) mutant cannot properly count and decode the Ca2+-APs and is thus unable to snap close its trap and to produce sufficient JA in response to prolonged mechanostimulation. The JA-dependent steps of the hunting cycle can, however, be rescued by external JA application in DYSC (Iosip et al., 2023). This shows that prey capture, recognition and processing are under the control of the Ca2+ and the JA clock.

II. Development of trap excitability
As long as the development runs through the juvenile stages, the flytrap cannot fire the archetypical AP. In the immature trap, however, the same slow and variable electrical signals (so-called slow wave potentials, SWPs) are produced upon wounding just like in Dionaea's petiole and Arabidopsis leaves (Mousavi et al., 2013; Scherzer et al., 2022a). SWPs are elicited when a plant gets severely wounded. In contrast to the AP, SWPs do not come as all-or-nothing electrical events and are magnitudes slower than the Dionaea AP. They are also called variation potentials, because they vary in shape and amplitudes. The fact that there are no SWP like the other may mean that, at the point of recording, several events from different inputs (local and from some distance) superimpose.

During the final step of trap development from the closed stage to the open stage, trigger hairs gain touch sensitivity, and the capture organ becomes electrically excitable. To identify the molecular origin of the AP, the RNA profiles of both trap stages were compared and differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified (Scherzer et al., 2022a). Among them, a GLR-type Ca2+ channel, an ALMT anion channel, a SKOR K+ channel and the H+-ATPase AHA4 were detected. In which phase of the AP do these channels play a role? What can we learn from pharmacology?

The Ca2+ channel blocker La3+ suppressed the anion channel-dependent depolarization, resulting in a complete block of Ca2+ signalling and AP generation after prolonged La3+ treatment (Scherzer et al., 2022a). Furthermore, touch- and glutamate-induced Ca2+-AP propagation is impeded in Dionaea under diethyl ether anaesthetics (Yokawa et al., 2018; Scherzer et al., 2022b), which is reminiscent of the suppression of glutamate-induced Ca2+ waves by diethyl ether in Arabidopsis (Jaksova et al., 2021). It is thus tempting to speculate that ether anaesthetics are targeting GLRs. In this context, it should also be mentioned that ether treatment also blocks touch/wounding-induced leaf movement in electrically excitable Mimosa pudica plants (De Luccia, 2012).

As mentioned above, later stages of prey processing are dominated by the touch hormone jasmonic acid (JA): Continuing contact of prey with trigger hairs stimulates JA production which turns the closed trap into a green stomach (Hedrich, 2015). Interestingly, the characteristics of the action potential can be modulated by insect feeding or JA treatment: the duration of the AP repolarization phase is prolonged, and the hyperpolarization is reduced when the green stomach is in the JA-dependent state of prey digestion and nutrient consumption. In both scenarios, the expression of the
 channel DmSKOR and the H+ ATPase DmAHA4 was found to be largely suppressed. A similar result – prolongation of AP repolarization – was obtained in traps treated with the K+ channel blocker Ba2+ (Scherzer et al., 2022a). Interestingly, repolarization of the SWP is also prolonged in the Arabidopsis aha1 mutant, thus pointing to the H+ pump's prominent role in this AP phase (Kumari et al., 2019).

These findings indicate that the GLR Ca2+ channel, an anion channel, two K+ channels, the H+ pump and H+-driven HAK5 and NRT-type K+ and anion transporters might be constituting the five distinct phases of Dionaea's AP (Fig. 1c). Based on the individual properties of these transporters in heterologous expression systems and changes in AP shape and kinetics, the Ca2+-electrical signal was modelled to probe for their individual role in shaping the AP (Scherzer et al., 2022a). This model is well in agreement with an initial Ca2+ influx via DmGLR3.6. This Ca2+ spark is amplified by a Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release from the ER to an all-or-nothing cytosolic Ca2+ transient (phase 1). This critical rise in cytosolic Ca2+ level is activating Ca2+-dependent ALMT anion channels, which mediate the rapid 100 mV depolarization (phase 2) of the membrane potential from its resting level at −120 to −140 mV. With the progressive shift of the membrane potential positive to −60 mV, depolarization-dependent DmSKOR K+ channels and DmAHA4 H+ pumps are activated. At c. −20 mV, when anion efflux and K+ efflux compensate each other, the depolarization maximum is reached. The repolarization (phase 3) sets in when [Ca2+]cyt drops, the anion channel inactivates, and DmSKOR and DmAHA4 provide for K+ and H+ release from the cell. During repolarization, negative from −60 mV DmSKOR inactivates, the depolarization-activated H+ pump takes over and causes a transient overshoot hyperpolarization (phase 4). During membrane hyperpolarization, DmAHA4 voltage inactivates and the H+-driven DmHAK5 as well as NRT-type anion transporters refill the K+ and A− battery and reset the pre-AP resting potential (phase 5; Iosip et al., 2020; Scherzer et al., 2022a).

Compared with the classical nerve and muscle AP that is based on a voltage-dependent Na+ channel for depolarization and a K+ channel for repolarization, the Dionaea AP is much more complex (please see also https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5Ri4VNX56CA). Most importantly, the flytrap AP and that of Mimosa (see below) strictly depend on calcium. Rather than being governed by a receptor potential threshold, like in the nerve/muscle AP, the initiation of a propagating electrical signals in plants is triggered when a critical cytoplasmic Ca2+ threshold is passed.

III. AP is a feature of all fast-moving plants
Like the Venus flytrap, touch-sensitive Mimosa pudica plants can fire an all-or-nothing AP and can move their leaves reasonably fast with 1.5 cm s−1 (Volkov et al., 2010). In this system, a Ca2+ wave propagates along the same route and at the same speed as the AP, too (Hagihara et al., 2022). This documents that the calcium and the electrical signal are two sides of the same coin. The Fabacea Mimosa pudica grows complex leaves with the petioles containing small pinnules, arranged on the rachis or midrib of the pinna. A pulvinus at the base of a plant leaf or leaflet facilitates thigmonastic movements. Upon touch or wounding such as flame stimulation of a leaflet, the Ca2+-electrical signals propagate the pinnules from the top of the rachis to the petiole, stem and along the stem. Thus, in contrast to the situation in Dionaea, where the AP is exclusively a trap feature, the electrical signal in Mimosa is spreading over the entire shoot. How can an electrical signal in Dionaea traps and the Mimosa shoot move so fast? Long-distance, high-speed communication in plants takes advantage of the vascular networks. Using phloem-sucking aphids, it has been shown that electrical signals in plants travel through the phloem (Fromm & Bauer, 1994; Fromm et al., 2013; Salvador-Recatala et al., 2014). In Mimosa pudica, protoxylem parenchyma and phloem cells were identified as the excitable entities (Samejima & Sibaoka, 1983).

Interestingly, the localization of the excitable cells in the vascular bundle in Mimosa is identical to that of GLR3.3 and GLR3.6 (Nguyen et al., 2018). The latter two glutamate receptor type Ca2+ channels are required for long-distance Ca2+-electrical signalling in Arabidopsis (Mousavi et al., 2013; Toyota et al., 2018). That the APs and wounding-induced SWPs (Mousavi et al., 2013; Gao et al., 2023) travel along the phloem does not come as a surprise, since the interconnected sieve tubes without a vacuole, nucleus and chloroplast provide for a perfect cable (Hedrich et al., 2016).

Long-distance action potentials need to be self-sustaining, as is the case of the Mimosa pudica and Dionaea muscipula AP and the Arabidopsis thaliana SWP. The major energy source in a plant cable is the (1) membrane potential, (2) an inward-directed Ca2+ gradient and (3) an outward-directed glutamate gradient. This three-component system can make the AP and SWP robust and self-sustained.

Which role may xylem parenchyma cells serve, in addition to the phloem elements? Based on his wounding experiments with Mimosa plants in 1916, Ubaldo Ricca came up with the idea that xylem vessels could traffic plant defence mediators (Ricca, 1926). This ‘Ricca's factor’ hypothesis was later used to explain wound-induced, long-distance, electrical waves. Very recently, the Ted Farmer laboratory found that in Arabidopsis, the SWP in response to wounding is associated with a xylem-traveling ‘Ricca's factor’ identified as myrosinase/glucosinolate-derived aglucone moiety (Gao et al., 2023; Hedrich & Roelfsema, 2023). It is possible that Ricca's factor provides the interface between xylem and phloem by facilitation of tissue-dependent glutamate release. In future studies, the nature and properties of the vascular bundle AP and SWP and the ion channels, pumps and carriers involved need to be characterized as well as the sensitivity of the GLRs to Ricca's factors.

IV. Role of ion channels in electrical signalling and ionic osmolyte flow
In sensitive plants, the AP is the trigger for fast movement but is not its driver. Only a small quantity of ions is needed to pass a membrane barrier to charge or discharge the membrane potential. Osmotic effects such as turgor and volume changes, however, depend on mass flow of ions. Stomatal guard cells belong to the latter category of systems. Two guard cells within a stomatal complex form a hydrodynamically driven valve that controls transpiration water loss. Guard cell ion channels open and conduct ions in response to voltage and/or Ca2+ changes in a fraction of a second (Hedrich, 2012). Stomatal movement based on the mass flow of guard cell K+ and anions, however, takes c. 10–15 min to close an open stomatal pore. An optogenetics approach based on the light-gated anion channel ACR1 introduced to guard cells (Huang et al., 2021) demonstrated that opening of anion channels is sufficient to close stomata: When ACR1 or the guard cell's native anion channels of the SLAC/SLAH type open, the membrane depolarizes and activates voltage-dependent GORK type
 channels. Prolonged anion and K+ release results in decreased guard cell osmotic pressure and turgor. In grasses, stomatal movement is faster than in dicot plants. In the former, the pairs of guard cells (GCs) are surrounded by a pair of subsidiary cells (SCs; Schaefer et al., 2018). During stomatal opening, K+ and anions are released (push) by SCs and taken up (pull) by GCs, while this ionic osmolyte shuttle transport is reversed when grass stomata close (Raschke & Fellows, 1971; Schaefer et al., 2018).

A similar push–pull shuttle transport is active in the pulvinus that allows moving of Fabacean leaves and leaflets. Nyctinastic movement is triggered by alternating ion movement and, in turn, swelling and shrinking of two types of motor cells in the pulvinus named flexor and extensor (Moran, 2007). In Samanea saman, a nonexcitable Fabacean sister of Mimosa pudica, the circadian expression of a SLAH type anion channel and a GORK/SKOR type K+ channel appears to be key in leaf movement, since the respective loss-of-function mutants are not able to move anymore (Oikawa et al., 2018).

As mentioned above, in the Venus flytrap there are two types of movements: a fast one taking just a fraction of a second and a slow one taking a few hours (Escalante-Perez et al., 2014). The trap lobes have the typical morphology of a dicot leaf with densely packed palisade cells of small volume on the abaxial side and more loosely staggered, larger cells on the adaxial, inner side of the trap. After the trap has snapped shut, it is not sealed completely yet. In a JA-dependent process, the inner lobe side shrinks and the other swells (Scherzer et al., 2017), which leads to hermetical trap sealing and green stomach formation. What is the driving force for the fast movement? In the open trap, the turgor of the inner and outer cell layer is balanced but represents a metastable system. Upon mechano-electrical stimulation, the internal hydrostatic pressure is released in a process called buckling (Forterre et al., 2005), which requires only a minute turgor loss in the inner trap leaflet. What if only the anion channel located in the inner leaflet was sensitive to the Ca2+-AP? In this case, the Ca2+ rise associated with the second AP would depolarize the cells there to release anions and K+ locally, thus triggering a snapping critical turgor difference (Fig. 1d).

V. Concluding remarks
In the flytrap system, APs are not only provoked by touch, the insect-physiological stimulus, but also by wounding, cold and heat (Fabricant et al., 2021; Scherzer et al., 2022b; Iosip et al., 2023). All these stresses have in common that they induce a rise in cytoplasmic Ca2+ level. What do we know about the receptor Ca2+ channels involved? In Arabidopsis, OSCAs have been identified as osmo/mechano-sensitive Ca2+ channels (Yuan et al., 2014; Murthy et al., 2018), and in the trigger hair of the Venus flytrap, an OSCA1.7 is very likely involved in hapto-calcium-electrical signal transduction (Procko et al., 2021; Scherzer et al., 2022b). The nature of the cold and the heat receptor channel is still unknown, but they very likely represent independent entities. Future experiments will have to show whether and how receptor-independent critical Ca2+ signals are encoded and communicated via the same AP. How much information is contained in a single Ca2+-AP and how is the number of successive signals decoded and counted? In Mimosa pudica, the entire shoot is excitable, while in Dionaea, it is just the trap. Is AP firing associated with other organs of plants known for their fast movement such as the touch-sensitive bilobed stigmata in Mimulus guttatus? The Mimosa mutant elp1b1 lost genes required to build a moveable leaf/leaflet base but not the capability to fire APs (Hagihara et al., 2022). Will we find APs in other plant organs that naturally do not move? Are the Dionaea and Mimosa AP may be the tip of an iceberg and Arabidopsis the exception?

Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the German Research Foundation (DFG) Reinhart Koselleck Grant 415282803 to R.H. We thank Tracey Ann Cuin, Dirk Becker and Rob Roelfsema for their helpful discussions and critical reading of this manuscript. Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.